GOUGH, Sister Mary de Lellis. February 15, 1892–April 7, 1983.
Catholic University of America (Catholic Sisters College) (BA 1920, MA
1923), Catholic University of America (PhD 1931).

Margaret Gough was born in Kilmore, County Wexford, Ireland, the daughter
of Ellen (Dunne) and Walter Gough. She attended convent schools in Wexford for
her elementary and intermediate education. She arrived in Galveston, Texas, on
a ship from Liverpool on September 9, 1909, as one of a group of at least thirty
novices from Ireland. She immediately entered the Congregation of the Sisters of
Charity of the Incarnate Word in San Antonio, Texas, and took the religious name
Mary de Lellis. Her profession of vows was in 1911. She continued her studies at
Incarnate Word College, at that time a women’s college and now the coeducational
University of the Incarnate Word, in San Antonio.

Early in her teaching career Sister Mary de Lellis taught in Catholic elementary
schools in Texas and in Missouri. She ﬁrst taught high school mathematics at St.
Mary’s Academy in Amarillo, Texas. She earned her bachelor’s degree from Catholic
University in Washington, D.C., in 1920. She then began her college teaching of
mathematics at Incarnate Word College and remained there for more than twenty
years except for years when she was doing graduate work in mathematics. She ﬁrst
taught there until the second semester of 1921–22, when she was a graduate student
at the University of Oklahoma. She then returned to Catholic University in 1922–
23 and received her master’s degree in 1923 before returning to Incarnate Word
College until 1928. She studied at the University of Texas in the summer of 1927.
Sister Mary de Lellis had a leave from Incarnate Word beginning in 1928 for
further graduate study at Catholic University, where she was in residence until
1931. She was one of four women religious who received PhD’s in mathematics
from Catholic in 1931; the other three were Sister Leonarda Burke, Sister Charles
Mary Morrison, and Sister Mary Felice Vaudreuil. All four wrote their dissertations
in algebraic geometry under the direction of Aubrey E. Landry. After she received
her PhD with minors in education and physics, Sister Mary de Lellis returned to
Incarnate Word College to teach mathematics until 1943. In 1943–44 she was a
mathematics teacher at Incarnate Word Academy in St. Louis, Missouri, before
becoming ill and requiring hospitalization at St. Anthony’s Hospital in Amarillo,
Texas. At this point, she changed from college teaching to working in the ﬁnance
oﬃce at St. Joseph’s Hospital in Fort Worth, where she was the chief accountant
and treasurer for the next twenty years.

In 1964 Sister Mary de Lellis moved to St. Joseph’s Convent, a home for retired
sisters in San Antonio. She remained until her death there at age ninety-one in
1983. She is buried in the Incarnate Word Convent cemetery.
Organizational aﬃliation: AMS.

Thesis and dissertation:
1923 The representability of a number by an indeﬁnite binary quadratic form. MA thesis,
submitted to the Catholic Sisters College of the Catholic University of America. Type-
script.
1931 On the condition for the existence of triangles in-and-circumscribed to certain types
of the rational quartic curve and having a common side. PhD dissertation, Catholic Univer-
sity of America, directed by Aubrey Edward Landry. Printed for the Catholic University
of America, Washington, DC. Review: JFM 57.0826.03 (F. Schaale).

Book Web Page

GOUGH - 2

Other sources: PhD dissertation vita 1931; Owens questionnaire 1937; application for
social security number 1966; communications with Incarnate Word Generalate Archives,
Sr. Margaret Patrice Slattery of the University of the Incarnate Word, and University of
Oklahoma Oﬃce of the Senior Vice President and Provost; SSDI.

Last modiﬁed: December 10, 2008.

