HSIA, Shu Ting (Liu). September 25, 1903–August 16, 1980.
University of Michigan (BS 1926, MS 1927, PhD 1930).

Shu Ting Liu was born in Beijing, China, the eldest of several children of Shien-
Ying Chen and Te-Yuang Liu. In 1925 her father was described as a railroad en-
gineer. One of her siblings was a foreign minister in the Taiwan government until
after 1967.

Apparently her precollege schooling, and possibly some university education, was
obtained in Beijing before she came to the United States. It appears that she entered
the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor in 1923 and remained through August
1929. In 1923 she listed as guardian Mrs. Heking, a former dean of Peking University,
who at the time was living in Ann Arbor. Shu Ting Liu attended Michigan as a
holder of a Barbour Scholarship for Oriental Women, from a scholarship program
funded by Levi L. Barbour and established by the university in 1917 for women
from Asia who planned to study medicine or education. At the same time, Barbour
donated money for the building of the Betsy Barbour dormitory for women, where
Liu lived for at least two years as a graduate student. She was a member of the
Chinese Students Club at Michigan some years as an undergraduate and graduate
student.

Shu Ting Liu earned a bachelor’s degree in 1926, a master’s degree in 1927, and
ﬁnished her work for the PhD in August 1929. In 1927 she was paid $75 to work as
an assistant in the electrical engineering department. Despite the title of her PhD
dissertation, “Theory of periodic orbits for asteroids of integral types,” her degree
was in mathematics; her dissertation gave “the construction of periodic solutions
of the diﬀerential equations for the plane motion of an inﬁnitesimal body subject
to the attraction of Jupiter and the Sun.” The doctorate was conferred in March
1930.

Liu was a substitute instructor for an ill faculty member for two months in
1929 at Colorado College in Colorado Springs. In December 1929, Liu married
Pin Fang (also “Pinfang”) Hsia (1902–1970) in Colorado Springs. Hsia, born in
Anhui Province in eastern China, attended Tsinghua University in Beijing before
coming to the United States as a Chung Hua scholar from Beijing and graduating
from Colorado College and then from the Harvard Graduate School of Business
Administration in about 1929.

In April 1930, the Hsias were living in Detroit, Michigan, where he was working
with stocks and bonds. That summer they returned to China. In November 1930,
Shu Ting Liu Hsia reported to the Michigan alumni oﬃce that she was a teacher
in Shanghai College. On November 24, 1931, Yujen Edward, the ﬁrst of their two
children, was born in Shanghai. Their daughter, Lucia, was born June 9, 1937, also
in Shanghai. Soon thereafter the family escaped to Hong Kong, presumably at the
time of the Battle of Shanghai, which began in August 1937. A short article in
the Colorado College Alumni News in December 1941 notes, “Mr. and Mrs. Hsia
lost all their household furnishings . . . in a raid by the Japanese before the couple
returned to the United States” (Colorado College Archives).

In August 1939, the Hsia family arrived in the United States, where they re-
mained until 1946. During that period Pinfang Hsia was manager of the Bank of
China in New York. In 1944, Shu Ting Hsia reported that, in addition to caring
for her children, she was also engaged in teaching. She was listed as a temporary,

Book Web Page

HSIA - 2

part-time instructor at Hunter College for the academic year 1944–45. In 1944 her
husband went to Canada to set up a branch oﬃce.

In 1946 Pinfang Hsia was transferred to the branch in London, where he was
resident manager of the Bank of China and was responsible for major expansion
into Europe. Shu Ting Hsia and Lucia returned to New York in 1950 after the
government changed in China. Yujen Edward Hsia was, at the time, a student at
Oxford University. Lucia Hsia attended Wells College and married in 1959; she
later divorced. Pinfang Hsia stayed on in London until the legal question of bank
ownership was resolved. He later became alienated from both the nationalist and
Communist headquarters of the Bank of China, submitted his resignation, and
returned to New York, where he worked for Magnus Mabee & Reynard, an oil ﬁrm,
until his retirement.

After Shu Ting Hsia returned to New York, she did some statistical work for
the city of New York. Her application for a social security account number in 1957
indicates that she was then working for the New York City Youth Board.

Pinfang Hsia died in New York in December 1970, a year after becoming a US
citizen. At the time of his death Y. Edward Hsia was an assistant professor of
genetics at Yale University, and Lucia Hsia Chinn was living in San Antonio. Y.
Edward Hsia has since retired from the University of Hawaii, where he specialized
in pediatrics and medical genetics; Lucia Chinn died in California in 1995.

In an e-mail to one of the authors in June 1998, Y. Edward Hsia wrote about his
mother: “My mother . . . enjoyed working in mathematics, and I believe she enjoyed
teaching, but her primary commitment must have been to establish a home for her
family, which prevented her from pursuing a more formal career in mathematics.
Interestingly, she was always interested in contract or tournament bridge and was
trying to become a master after she retired.” He continued, “My mother was a
rare example in her time of someone with a fairly classical Chinese upbringing – as
a woman – who took the exceptional course of venturing to [the] USA for higher
education, and was able to win a scholarship and earn a doctorate. She remained,
however, a little uncomfortable with American mores and idiom.”

After her retirement Shu Ting Liu Hsia moved to New Haven, Connecticut.
Having been in ill health for some time, she died, possibly from aplastic anemia,
at age seventy-six in West Haven, Connecticut, in 1980. In 1981 a gift of $8000
was made to the University of Michigan from the estate of Shu Ting Liu Hsia. A
share of this was to augment the Barbour scholarship fund, “as an expression of
[her] gratitude for the scholarship given to [her]” (University of Michigan Alumni
Records Oﬃce).
Dissertation:
1929 [Lui, S. T.] Theory of periodic orbits for asteroids of integral types. PhD disserta-
tion, University of Michigan, directed by Louis Allen Hopkins. Typescript. PhD 1930.

Other sources: application for social security account number 1957; private communi-
cation with Yujen Edward Hsia, June 18, 1998; University of Michigan Alumni Records
Oﬃce; communications with Colorado College Archives, University of Michigan Archives
and Records Program, and with Bentley Historical Library, University of Michigan; “Pin-
fang Hsia, 68, Bank of China Aide,” (Obituary) New York Times, 23 Dec 1970; US Census
1930 MI; SSDI.

Last modiﬁed: December 11, 2008.

