MAYER, Joanna Isabel. March 6, 1904–February 28, 1991.
Dominican College of San Rafael (BA 1927), Marquette University (MA 1928,
PhD 1931).

Joanna Isabel Mayer was born in Pettis County, near Sedalia, Missouri, the
third of ﬁve children of Anna (Poinsignon) (1871–1960) and Edward John Mayer
(ca. 1869–1941), both born in Missouri. Her parents, of farm families, continued to
farm after their marriage in Sedalia in about 1897. Her siblings were Emil Joseph
(1898–1967), Mary Helen (Ella) (1902–1981), Francis Nicholas (1906–1995), and
Elizabeth (1909–1989). Census records indicate that in 1910 the family was living
in Dresden Township, near Sedalia, Missouri, and Edward Mayer was a farmer;
in 1920 the family was living in Portland, Oregon, where he was a farmer and a
laborer; in 1930 they were living in Salina, Kansas. No occupation was indicated
for her father, but Joanna Mayer was listed as a parochial school teacher.

Letters written in 1984 and 1985, when Joanna Mayer was about eighty years
old, describe her family’s many moves and the schools she attended before she
entered college. There is also sketchy material about places she lived and jobs she
held. It has been impossible to conﬁrm all of the details.

It appears that the only schools she attended were Catholic schools, and later
she only taught in such schools. She ﬁrst attended the Sacred Heart school in
Sedalia, Missouri. In about 1917 the family moved to Hollywood, California, where
she and Ella attended Cathedral High School. After the “great ﬂu” they moved to
Phoenix, Arizona, where her father and brother sold cars. They moved back to Los
Angeles, from there to San Jose, and then to Portland, Oregon, for a year. It has
been conﬁrmed that she was in the ﬁrst academic class at St. Mary’s Academy in
Portland during the school year 1919–20, when she was ﬁfteen years old. Joanna
Mayer reported that the family then moved to Seattle, then brieﬂy to Spokane, and
then to Kansas City, Missouri, where she went to Loretto High School, a Catholic
girls’ school. They moved to Florida and ended up in Nashville, Tennessee, where
she went to St. Bernard’s High School. From there they moved to Kansas City and
then to Salt Lake City, and back to San Jose, in the San Francisco Bay area, where,
with some interruptions, she and some members of her family were to spend much
of the remainder of their lives.

According to records at Dominican College in San Rafael, California, Joanna
Mayer graduated from Notre Dame High School in San Jose before entering Do-
minican College for her undergraduate work. Apparently the family ﬁrst lived in
Oakland and then in San Rafael while she attended college. Mayer indicated that
she started to study mathematics while in Oakland and started to major in mathe-
matics her second year in college. In May 1927 Mayer received her BA degree from
Dominican College with a major in mathematics and a minor in philosophy. While
there she was inﬂuenced by Anna Marie Whelan, who taught at Dominican 1925–27
before moving to a position at Hunter College.

Mayer’s older sister, Mary Helen Mayer, also attended Dominican College in
San Rafael and earned a bachelor’s degree in 1926. She earned a master’s degree
from Marquette University in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in 1928 with a thesis, “The
Educational Theories of St. Thomas Aquinas.” It appears from correspondence with
Joanna Mayer that her sister Mary Helen taught at Dominican College for a while.

Book Web Page

MAYER - 2

Her youngest sister received a bachelor’s degree from Clarke College, a Catholic
college in Dubuque, Iowa, in 1932.

Mayer entered Marquette University graduate school in 1927 and remained en-
rolled until 1931; she received the MA degree in June 1928. In the preface to her
master’s thesis she wrote, “The choice from the ﬁeld of Invariants of a topic for a
thesis grew out of an interest in the subject which my major Professor at Dominican
College, San Rafael, California, inspired in the last course I had the privilege of tak-
ing from her. To Dr. Anne Marie Whelan, then, I owe my ﬁrst acknowledgment of
gratitude.” Mayer’s election to membership in the MAA was announced in the June
1930 issue of the Monthly, and her position, presumably for the 1929–30 academic
year, was described as head of the department at Marymount College in Salina,
Kansas, where she and her parents were living. In June 1931 she received her PhD,
the ﬁrst awarded by Marquette in mathematics. Her dissertation was directed by
H. P. Pettit, who had also directed her master’s thesis.

Mayer’s dissertation begins:

Ruth Gentry introduces her dissertation On the Forms of Plane
Quartic Curves as follows:

“Many papers dealing with curves of the fourth order, or
Quartic Curves, are to be found in the various mathemat-
ical periodicals; but these leave the actual appearance of
the curve as a whole so largely to the reader’s imagina-
tion that it is here proposed to give a complete enumer-
ation of the fundamental forms of Plane Quartic Curves
as they appear when projected so as to cut the line inﬁn-
ity the least possible number of times . . . , together with
evidence that the forms presented can exist.”

It is the purpose of my dissertation to show whether it is possible to
derive, and how to construct, all of the forms proposed in Gentry’s
dissertation by the method used by Doctor H. P. Pettit in his
“Projective Description of Some Higher Plane Curves.”

Mayer’s dissertation ends with a description of those curves enumerated by Gentry
that she succeeded in generating.

Joanna Mayer’s name appears on the November 1931 MAA membership list with
an address in Sedalia, Missouri. By some time in 1932 she is apparently a teacher
in San Jose, California. In 1937–38, Joanna Mayer was an instructor at Seton Hill
College (now Seton Hill University), a Catholic school in Greensburg, Pennsylvania,
and at that time a women’s college. Articles in the Seton Hill alumnae magazine
and the student newspaper indicate that she was there to replace a faculty member
on leave for the year for graduate study. They report that she had come from San
Francisco College for Women, a Catholic college in California that is now closed,
and that she had previously taught at Saint Mary-of-the-Woods and at Clarke
College. In a March 15, 1938, article, “Please! Dr. Mayer is Math Professor, Not
a Freshman!,” in the Setonian, the Seton Hill student newspaper, she is described
as “brimming over with enthusiasm for Saturday morning hikes and moonlight
toboggan slides.” . . . “Enthusiastic, peppy and eager as she is, she cannot imagine
what Seton Hill does without the Paciﬁc Ocean. ‘Don’t you really miss surf riding?’
was her closing remark to the reporter for Setonian.”

Book Web Page

MAYER - 3

Mayer’s next position was at Xavier University in New Orleans (now Xavier
University of Louisiana), the only Catholic institution among the historically black
colleges and universities. Material from the Xavier archives includes correspondence
related to her position there. In an inquiry of January 1939 from Sedalia, Missouri,
to Xavier University, Mayer wrote that she had read with interest their monthly
bulletin about the education of “colored young people.” She noted that her sister
Mary Helen had written to them before but that at the time she, Joanna, “was
not well enough to teach large classes.” She reported that she was stronger and
“would be willing to teach nine or ten hours of Mathematics for the equivalent
of board and room and a little spending money, providing by doing so I would
be of assistance to your Xavier University. I do not have an appointment for this
semester, not that I could not make myself useful at home, but it seems a little
selﬁsh to stay at home when I could be of some use to a Catholic college.” She
wrote that she had taught in well-known Catholic colleges for eight years. She also
indicated that she had taught chemistry and education but preferred mathematics
and appended a list of courses she had taught. The list includes most courses in
the standard undergraduate curriculum plus modern geometry, higher plane curves,
advanced calculus, theory of equations, history of mathematics, modern algebraic
theory, projective geometry, and invariants.

In August 1939 Mayer received a letter from the president of Xavier University
indicating that their mathematics teacher had asked to be released and inviting
her to come under the terms she had suggested in her earlier letter. Thus, Mayer
began teaching at Xavier in autumn 1939 at about $85 per month, which was to
include room and board, “not as salary, . . . but as the compensation which would
be agreeable to [her].” During the summer of 1940 she was at home in Sedalia,
Missouri. A letter of August 1 inquired whether her services would be wanted at
Xavier in the fall.

Mayer did return to Xavier for the 1940–41 academic year, but she wrote in
February 1941, indicating that her services would not be available after June. She
returned to Sedalia, where her father was suﬀering from cancer. Mayer expressed
the hope that they could get back to Oakland, California, by September but was
doubtful that her father’s health would be good enough for travel. She remained in
Sedalia, where he died late in December. Mayer indicated that her mother sold the
eighty-acre farm in Missouri, and she and her mother moved to San Jose.

In a letter to Xaxier in the summer of 1942 she mentioned that she hoped to
teach at Stanford, but they did not know for certain whether they would need her.
She also noted that her mother had grandchildren in the San Francisco Bay area. In
August 1942 Mayer wrote to Xavier that she had an oﬀer of a position at San Jose
State College but needed a junior college credential; in order to make application
for that credential she needed a letter verifying her teaching experience. This she
received from Xavier, but it appears that she did not teach anywhere during the
year 1942–43. Mayer wrote in a letter to the Marquette graduate school dean in
1956 that she left teaching in 1942 and had supported herself since by buying and
selling stocks. It is not clear from Mayer’s letters written in the 1980s how she spent
the rest of her life, although listings in the AMS and city directories indicate that
after she returned to California following her father’s death, she spent most of the
rest of the 1940s in Santa Clara, California, working at least some of the time as a
stenographer.

Book Web Page

MAYER - 4

Mayer wrote in 1985 that during World War II she served in Washington, D.C.,
and that in 1950 she did secretarial work for the Guided Missiles Committee, De-
partment of Defense, Pentagon, Washington, D.C. She also wrote that she worked
for over thirteen years in military pay, etc. at the military personnel records center
in St. Louis. We have not been able to conﬁrm this information.

At various times during her life, Mayer was unable to work because of illness.
She was a devout Roman Catholic who lived much of the latter part of her life in
San Jose, California. She died at the San Jose Medical Center of cardiac arrest in
1991, two days after having had a mastectomy and a week before her eighty-seventh
birthday. Mayer is buried at the Santa Clara Mission Cemetery in California.
Organizational aﬃliations: AMS, MAA.

Thesis and dissertation:
1928 A geometric interpretation and classiﬁcation of the invariants of the binary and
ternary conics and cubics. MA thesis, Marquette University, directed by Harvey Pierson
Pettit. Typescript.
1931 Projective description of plane quartic curves. PhD dissertation, Marquette Uni-
versity, directed by Harvey Pierson Pettit. Typescript. See also 1932.

Publication:
1932 Projective description of plane quartic curves. Tˆohoku Math. J. 36:1–21. Published
version of PhD dissertation. Reviews: JFM 58.0700.03 (M. Steck); Zbl 005.21612 (G.
Schaake).

Other sources: MA thesis preface 1928; application for social security number 1962; cor-
respondence with Smithsonian Institution and with author 1984, 1985; Xavier University
Archives (via Susan Korn); communications with Clarke College Archives, Dominican Col-
lege Archives, Marquette University Archives, Seton Hill University Archives, and with
St. Mary’s Academy; US Census 1900, 1910 MO, 1920 OR, 1930 KS; California death
certiﬁcate; SSDI.

Last modiﬁed: July 20, 2009.

