METCALF, Ida M. August 26, 1856–October 24, 1952.
Boston University (PhB 1886), Cornell University (MS 1889, PhD 1893).

Ida Martha Metcalf was born in Texas, the daughter of Martha C. (Williams) and
Charles A. Metcalf. Her mother was born in 1823 in Vermont, and her father was
born in the early 1820s in Massachusetts. In 1850 Charles and Martha Metcalf were
living in Louisiana, where he was a bookkeeper. Ten years later, they and two girls,
Helen E., age nine, and Ida M., age three, were living in New Orleans, where Charles
was a clerk. In 1952 Pearson Hunt of the Harvard Business School sent the Cornell
University alumni oﬃce a short account of Ida Metcalf’s life in which he reported
that she had come to Boston from Texas on a sailboat with her brother and mother
soon after her father died. In 1870 Martha Metcalf and two children, thirteen-
year-old Ida and nine-year-old Edward C., were living in Needham, Massachusetts,
with Martha’s father and sisters. Hunt reported that while she was still in her
teens, Metcalf taught in small schools in New Hampshire and worked in the ﬁelds
after school. According to the 1880 census record, Ida Metcalf was then living in
Framingham, Massachusetts, and was a student. It appears she was also a third
assistant in the Hillside School in Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, in the late 1870s
and early 1880s while in her early to mid-twenties.

Metcalf entered Boston University as a special student in 1883. After being listed
by Boston University as a special student for two years, Metcalf was a regular
student and received her PhB with the class of 1886. She wrote a thesis, “The
Origin and Development of Styles of Architecture.”

During the year 1888–89, Metcalf was a graduate student in mathematics at
Cornell University. She received her master’s degree with a thesis, “The Theory of
Illumination by Reﬂected and Refracted Light.” In February 1891, while teaching
at the newly opened Bryn Mawr School in Baltimore, she inquired about returning
to Cornell to work on a doctorate in mathematics.

Metcalf spent the year 1892–93 at Cornell taking courses in geometry and anal-
ysis. At a meeting of the mathematical club in the spring of that year, Metcalf
presented a paper on the work of the algebraic geometer Charlotte Scott of Bryn
Mawr College. Serving on her doctoral committee were department head James E.
Oliver and Lucien Augustus Wait, the other full professor in the department. Al-
though Oliver was chair of Metcalf’s committee, she worked closely with George W.
Jones. In the preface to his Drill-Book in Algebra, Jones thanked her for spending
“half a year in giving form to the text and preparing the questions and exercises”
(1892, iv). She also took a course in projective geometry, the area of her dissertation,
with him. Her doctorate was awarded magna cum laude in 1893.

In September 1897 a list of appointments to the three public high schools in
New York City (then Manhattan and the Bronx) showed Ida M. Metcalf of Boston
having been appointed a second assistant for history at the Girls’ High School. In the
1900 census report Metcalf was listed with her mother and brother in Wellesley,
Massachusetts, and was described as a teacher of mathematics; her brother was
a carpenter. In June 1900 the following advertisement appeared in the Atlantic
Monthly Advertiser : “Newton Lower Falls. Study by the Sea. Tutoring during July
and August at a beautiful, restful, and inexpensive place on the coast of Maine.
Address Ida M. Metcalf, Ph.D., Newton L. Falls, Mass.” (p. 20).

Book Web Page

METCALF - 2

In 1902 an article critiquing an aspect of education in the United States appeared
with the author identiﬁed only as Ida M. Metcalf, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania. In
the article, “The pampered children of the poor,” (International Journal of Ethics
13:87–98), the author writes, “The explicit statements in this essay are based on
personal experience in high-school teaching in a great city with a very large foreign
population, and on the testimony of others engaged in the same work.”

Metcalf lived for a time in Newton Lower Falls, Massachusetts. She also worked
for a banking house in New York as a securities analyst. In 1909 she had printed
a nine-page pamphlet entitled “A demonstration of Fermat’s Theorem concerning
the equation xn + yn = zn.” The error in her argument was pointed out in a 1910
review of the pamphlet in Archiv der Mathematik und Physik.

In April 1910 Metcalf was living in Brooklyn and was a teacher according to
the census. At about that time she passed a competitive examination for a civil
service position with the City of New York and left the teaching profession. Some
of her later writing describes her pessimistic attitude toward education. In an article
that appeared in February 1911 she quoted actual answers to the New York State
Regents’ tests, uniform examinations given to high school students, in order to
document “the degree of confusion, misconception, and inarticulateness that may,
and often does, exist in the minds of some of our young people” (In lighter vein:
Humor in the regents’ examinations, 640). The following year she wrote a letter to
the editor of the New York Times stating that “the real mission of the schools, the
development of intellect and character, is not only shirked, but belittled” (“Material
aims of schools: Vocational training called a move in the wrong direction,” July 17,
1912).

In October 1910 Metcalf was appointed a monitor and in December 1910, at the
age of ﬁfty-three, she became a civil service examiner. Pearson Hunt reported that
she was the ﬁrst woman to take such an examination, and was appointed despite
her sex because of her performance. In 1912 she became a statistician for the De-
partment of Finance for New York City. She attempted to take the examination for
statistician in the Education Department but was not permitted to do so based on
her experience “though she had three college degrees, had taught public and private
school most of her life and had been statistician in the department of ﬁnance over
two years” (Report of an Investigation of the Municipal Civil Service Commission,
18). She remained in the Department of Finance until her retirement at the end
of 1921. In 1930 she was living in Jamestown, Rhode Island. She worked again as
a civil service examiner on a per diem basis until 1939, when she was eighty-one
years old.

During the time she was living in New York, Metcalf achieved some notoriety
when she placed the following advertisement in the New York Times of October 17,
1915:

To teachers and philanthropic workers:
Free home and liberal education will be given little girl 8 or 9 years
old with capacity to become a woman of high type if given oppor-
tunities for development, but now lacking such opportunities.

The Times carried a story the next day concerning the advertisement. Metcalf took
a ward, eight-year-old Theresa Kalab, who was born in Austria. Kalab studied at
New York University and Columbia University and at the Grand Central School
of Art and the Art Students League before becoming a commercial illustrator and

Book Web Page

METCALF - 3

author. At the time of Metcalf’s death, Theresa Kalab was married to Lawrence
Smith and living in Santa Fe, New Mexico.

In his 1952 letter, Pearson Hunt noted that “In view of her own hard struggles to
ﬁnd positions commensurate with her ability, Miss Metcalf throughout her life had
a very cynical view of higher education for women. Nevertheless, . . . Miss Metcalf
made a gift [to Cornell] which was earmarked for the assistance of women students.”
Metcalf also wrote letters to the editor of the New York Times indicating her
feminist beliefs. On January 25, 1914, the headline read “The rule of brute force”
and the letter following it critiqued an article by William T. Sedgwick, a professor
of biology at MIT:

Prof. Sedgwick told us complacently . . . that if women persist in
claiming the same rights as other citizens men will exert their su-
perior muscular force and reduce them to literal slavery. . . . Are
we to understand that all the men unable to hold their own against
a prizeﬁghter will be forcibly subdued and held in subjugation if
they ask for fair play and venture upon economic competition with
their stronger fellow beings? Apparently the dictum of science, as
expressed by this prophet, is that we are evolving backward toward
the ancestor we share with the gorilla.

On October 11, 1922, Metcalf expressed her views on “discrimination in business
circles against women of middle age, a condition the existence of which is readily
admitted by employers.” She wrote

The thinking women of today of any age are asking for our sex not
privilege but “a fair ﬁeld and no favor,” and intelligent employers, if
they would bring their business acumen and judgment to bear upon
the matter, would . . . seek the most competent and conscientious
worker quite irrespective of such incidental qualities as age, sex,
complexion, political aﬃliation or religious creed.

By 1931, Metcalf had moved to Jamestown, Rhode Island, where she had spent
summers for many years. In 1948 she became ill and moved to a nursing home in
Washington, Connecticut, before moving to Fairlawn Nursing Home in Lexington,
Massachusetts, where she lived just over a year before her death from arteriosclerosis
at age ninety-six. She was buried in the Lincoln Cemetery in Lincoln, Massachusetts.
Thesis and dissertation:
1886 The origin and development of styles of architecture. PhB thesis, Boston University.
1889 The theory of illumination by reﬂected and refracted light. MS thesis, Cornell Uni-
versity. Handwritten.
1893 Geometric duality in space. PhD dissertation, Cornell University, directed by James
Edward Oliver. Printed by E. D. Norton, Ithaca, NY.

Publications:
1909 A Demonstration of Fermat’s Theorem Concerning the Equation xn + yn = zn.
New York: Charles E. Merrill, 1909. Review (listed under Ida M. Metclaﬀ, PhD): Archiv
der Math. und Phys. 3rd ser., 16:281 #57 (A. Fleck).
1911 “In lighter vein: Humor in the regents’ examinations.” Century Illustrated Monthly
Magazine 8 (1911): 640–42.

References to: BioWMath.
“Wants to Educate Girl.” New York Times, 18 Oct 1915.
Obituary. Cornell Alumni News, Feb 1953.

Book Web Page

METCALF - 4

Other sources: Division of Rare and Manuscript Collections, Cornell University Library;
Williams Papers; communication with City of New York Department of Personnel; Report
of an Investigation of the Municipal Civil Service Commission and of the Administration
of the Civil Service Law and Rules in the City of New York (Albany, NY: J. B. Lyon
Company, 1915); WhoAmW 1 (Smith, Theresa Kalab); US census 1860 LA, 1870, 1880,
1900 MA, 1910 NY, 1930 RI; Massachusetts death certiﬁcate.

Last modiﬁed: July 20, 2009.

